this is steve bookchester in washington
because of interest in the previous two
episodes
today on military monitor we present the
third section of testimony
from the national veterans inquiry into
u.s war crimes policy
organized by anti-war vietnam veterans
the inquiry took place the first three
days of december 1970
at washington's dupont plaza hotel
the washington meeting was preceded by
similar hearings in 13 other cities
and heard testimony from dozens of
discharged vietnam veterans
active duty military officers were
present to hear the testimony
and it is possible that they will
attempt to bring military charges
against top-ranking officers as a result
of the inquiry
in the past the secretary of the army
has dismissed such charges
it was the contention of those who
testified that it is those at the top
who are responsible for the acts which
they committed and witnessed
they view the men charged in connection
with the events at milai escape
scapegoats
at the hearings the press audience
members and other members of the panel
were permitted to question the men
testifying
at this december 1st session we heard
michael ewell and richard dell
both veterans of the americal division
my name is michael j
ewell i was the first lieutenant in
military intelligence
i was assigned to the 11th brigade
the first military intelligence team
of the 11th brigade of the americal
division in november of 1968
and i'd like to just state briefly
about two uh state uh make some comments
about two points
as far as military intelligence behave
in vietnam is concerned
they are the the
systematic use of electrical torture and
eating fertilization
of vietnamese non-combatants
detainees by united states
troops and military intelligence
personnel
and also the general reliability
of any information guided by the
military intelligence
let me reverse the order and talk about
the reliability first
we created the mythology that we had in
my unit a 62
percent reliability factor because we
would we would pay people we had a net
in our counterintelligence section
we would pay people to come in and give
us information that we could never
verify now this information was used
if we felt it was relatively
reliable in other words we felt that by
going out to an area that was populated
we might at least find a rice cache
or just rice period we would try to
interest an infantry battalion into
reacting
however most of the time our information
reports were used as
input to artillery barrages
harassment and interdiction
b-52 raids and strikes and other air
strikes
at the end of the day the artillery
liaison officer
or the air liaison officer would call us
up and say give us some coordinates we
have some ordinance that we must
expend and so we would give them the
coordinates
of populated areas
in many cases
and they would use these to fulfill
their fire missions
that evening
specifically now about electrical
torture i witnessed myself
i was the uh the team chief and as such
i i i worked in both counter
intelligence all and also in
interrogation
and order of battle but i witnessed
not only in the interrogation section
which was located on the base camp
but also with the counterintelligent
agents uh counterintelligence agents out
in the field
the frequent use of electrical torture
uh
uh implementing a uh
using the the ta312 field telephone
which was part of the organic equipment
of any unit any combat unit
now this was used uh
this the the wires coming from this uh
this telephone were buried and attached
to the sensitive parts
of detainee's body uh i witnessed
personally
uh it's being used on fingers primarily
also on ears and uh
the crank was turned and it gave out a
charge
now in one case i saw a young girl
who was detained by an infantry unit
brought into the 11th brigade base camp
and brought back into a bunker at the
interrogation center
and she was electrically tortured to the
point that she
menstruated and fell to the floor
in the field i witnessed uh
a young boy and an old man
who were detained after an afforded
operation we were sent out there to look
for cave
uh where there's supposedly some uh viet
cong
activity and
two people this old man and a young boy
were detained on their way from their
rice field it was evening and they were
bringing their water buffalo back
to their hooch now in the presence of
two
majors the exo and uh an engineer
uh advisor to the first of the twentieth
which is the same battalion that
lieutenant colley was in incidentally
uh these two young boy i'd say about 12
years old
and the old man i'd say in his 60s were
both
pistol whipped by american ci agents
uh using 38 snub nose
revolvers and they were electrically
tortured
i'd say both of these men were gravely
injured electrical torture at the 11th
brigade base camp was used on a daily
basis
uh on people who were generally
classified
as innocent civilians
at the termination of the interrogation
uh often these people were removed from
their lands and brought into the uh
uh at a great distance from the 11th
brigade which was located in duck foe
and then they were just turned loose at
the gate and told to find their own way
back to their land
now many of them were also classified as
civil defendants
in fact there was tremendous pressure
from our
our headquarters from the colonel to
classify
people as civil defendants these are
people who we were supposed to determine
had
in some way violated vietnamese law none
of us were qualified
in fact to interpret vietnamese law and
none of us really spoke the language
however we were to determine if people
were draft charges or another way
in other ways had violated the law
if they were many people many charges
were jumped up
because of the pressure and many people
were classified as
civil defenders who would otherwise have
been classified as innocent civilians
there was tremendous competition among
the brigades to see who would have the
largest number of civil uh defendants
it's uh significant to note that we
didn't the reason there was such
pressure to classify civil defendant
is because we very rarely got bonafide
guerrillas
or nva troops and i would say no more
than a handful of people were classified
actually classified as possible
prisoners of war
uh the entire time i was in vietnam now
these people that were classified as
civil defendants
went through a cycle of torture there
they were
picked up by the infantry units mainly
uh
in most cases because they were present
in their villages at the time a sweep
was going on
they were brutalized by the infantry
brought in
electrically tortured and beaten by the
mi
turned over to mac v after they were
classified
as civil defendants where they were
again put through beatings and torturing
and finally turned over to the national
police
where they underwent another series of
torches and beatings
after after this they were either thrown
into their already
overcrowded jails or released
all right brother any questions
[Music]
yeah well often uh i was out in the
field and witnessed the brutalization of
people out in the field
many times people came into us already
bruised
and told us through interpreters how
they had been brutalized and sealed
now in max v we turned the people over
directly to max c which was located some
500 meters outside of our front gate
and we had very very close liaison with
smack v district headquarters stuck foe
and we also had very very close liaison
with the national police chief
and his uh and the national police and
duck foe
so we often witness these
can you tell us
no this was de facto policy it was uh i
had heard about it when i was in
military intelligence training and at
fort hollerberg
uh off the record uh after class you go
up to the instructor and say or what's
it really like in vietnam and they tell
you about prisons being thrown out of
helicopters and
and uh 312 uh failed phones and
batteries used
to electrically torture people and other
other more
uh other torture techniques so none of
which i have witnessed water torture
bamboo etc
and when i got to vietnam these sops
standing operation procedures had
already been established in the united
[Music]
target you know they actually would call
you up and say we have some ordinance we
have to extend
did you elaborate on this whole theme of
the week
probably the uh i know that there was we
had a an ammo
or an ordinance dump at the 11th brigade
headquarters and that every
several days this was replenished the
stock was replenished
so they had so many so many rounds of
high explosive
uh eight inch uh 105 155 howitzer rounds
that they would have to expend within a
certain period of time
because the convoy would be going back
to quinyan to resupply
getting this stuff off the docks it
would cycle right back to the united
or any kind states voter you know we've
got to fire so many shows
we've got to eat the other guys
no i i don't know exactly even what the
number of shells were that they had to
fire
yeah by the end of the night they would
try to get the some targets
if they didn't get targets from the
infantry units out in the field that day
during their sweeps
they would come to us in the afternoon
like a military intelligence people
rather
use the artillery to get them
so we could never verify whether our
intelligence is right or wrong except uh
one or two cases where we did go out and
find a rice pasta
and i suspect that was more by
coincidence
[Music]
some of the the
tactical field policies that do exist
are subject to uh you've missed the
coverings so like free fire zone search
and destroy
these uh uh pacification relocation all
of these things have been known in the
american public for years
and uh they're like pablo they just take
them down at the evening news
uh i guess they couldn't figure any any
way to cover up electrical torture and
so it just never
uh if they never created a nice a nice
euphemism for it but it has been going
on since uh uh 19 uh
to my knowledge 1963 we have a man that
testified seeing it 1963 in special
forces
and um can you tell me how you knew the
two men who just hit
[Music]
uh
i would say the interrogation section of
my team worked an average of
12 15 hours a day there was swamp the
infantry would just bring in
uh oh 20 30 40 detainees a day mostly
old man women uh girl
so uh i i would say
i would have really no way to estimate i
would say
probably on a daily basis uh since i was
i was
the administrator for this team i wasn't
present in the interrogation center at
all times
so uh but i would i wouldn't say it was
used on every one
no i did not see it every day because i
was not the interrogation officer i had
an exo who was the interrogation officer
[Music]
no i never did keep a record i never uh
we
the the rationale at that time was that
well it didn't really hurt them
that's what that's the way we uh we sort
of brushed it off
well if something doesn't leave any
marks or anything and it's part of the
policy and what can we do anyway
[Music]
you could not classify as anybody as a
as a prisoner of war unless he was
captured with a weapon
mike i think in the interesting time
we're going to have to move on now
my name is richard dell i served with
company b first the 6th infantry 198th
lighting from true brigade
i also serve with first of the first
armored cab
or both units attached to the americal
division
i could tell them many things many small
instances but
effort to save time i'm going to say a
few of the things what i thought were
more
outstanding myself i never saw
a large-scale massacre of anyone but i
was witnessing
witness to a few instances of uh
slaughter of civilians i can know of one
instance where we went in
on a ca into a village it was a hot ca
meaning
uh the first lift of choppers caught
fire
and they receive fire from an nva
i guess you might call it a squad
approximately seven people
in uniform with weapons as good
in my opinion better than ours um
when we went into this village we
uh i was in the third lift which means
the third
group of helicopters to come in since
they can't land everybody at once they
bring you in at different lifts
and uh by the time i got there the
firing was over the fire fight was over
and the company was pulling what you
might call sweep or search and destroy
in that village during this time we took
all the civilians
and herded them into a central area so
that they could be interrogated
we completely ransacked every hooch
in the village turned everything out
all their valuables any
boxes or anything that they might have
had were opened and looked for
ammunition or anything and it one round
of
ammunition was found in that hooch it
was burned and
it was sort of a practice that if you
didn't find anything most people carried
a round or two
of uh enemy caliber weapon
in their pocket and they would just
throw it in the hooch and then show the
lieutenant say i
i found this and burn it down and at
this time we sent
three prisoners back into battalion to
be interrogated further
and then uh later on we captured another
person
this person like
there was no more helicopters to take
him in and they didn't want to let him
go
so the captain said that he should be
gotten rid of
so uh two people took the person's id
card
which if the south vietnamese doesn't
have an id card he's getting
he's a group he's vc
as supposedly any loyal citizen has an
id card
so these two people took his id card and
put it in their wallet
and then told him to take off and he ran
approximately 10 yards and turned around
to look to see what was happening
because his wife and his child were
standing right there
when he turned around there was a man
with a m-60 machine gun another man with
an m16 and they both let him have it
and uh he got hit with maybe 20
maybe 30 rounds of m65 or an m16
fire and uh he was laying there he was
still alive
and the medic was asked well what can
you do for this guy so the medic left
pointed m16 in his head pulled the
trigger and then stuck a cigarette out
in the womb
laughing about it another instance
uh we were on patrol and the company
approximately
two or three kilometers from us received
sniper fire
so our patrol was ordered to head in
that direction
while we were going in that direction we
apprehended two vietnamese civilians
working in a rice paddy
uh they weren't checked for id they
weren't
checked in any way to find out if they
were bc or if they were
just innocent bystanders the lieutenant
in charge of patrol
said they should be just gotten rid of
and they were shot by the lieutenant and
a few other people on the patrol
and uh i was also in the company which
started
a thing which is known as a rat patrol
where six or seven men will go outside
the perimeter
at night and roam around the countryside
around our night lager
and in that time anything with moved or
made a funny noise
was dead we were under orders
to shoot first and ask questions later
and we would walk through a village and
if any strange sounds were heard coming
from a
hooch or anything it could have been
people sleeping just turning on their
beds
we let loose and i know it was pretty
indiscriminate because one of my friends
was shot by another one of my friends
he thought he had heard something opened
up and shot my buddy in the rear with an
m16
rick was your company the only company
in the
battalion or the brigade that used rat
patrol uh
rat patrols were originated by a
lieutenant in my company
he was new in country and he wanted to
make a name for himself
so he volunteered us for rat patrols
and uh one instance
uh we supposedly had good results a lot
of
you know reported dead confirmed body
count
so because we had such a supposedly good
confirmed body
count
[Music]
it was made standard sop for the first
of the six
and i believe other units of the 198th
light infantry brigade
while i was there at one instance
we were outside of an lz called lz baldy
which is a pretty big base camp between
chulai and danang just off of highway
one
and while we were there we were set up
in a night lager
and up until this time we had been
receiving a lot of sniper fire a lot of
booby traps
a lot of people were getting wounded and
maimed and we sent out a rat patrol one
night and they went into a
village when they went into this village
it was
what you might call a secure village and
so much that there was
pf's there pf's popular forces
they're similar to uh the national guard
and it's their policy that if they see
strangers in the village to ring the
bell
the village bell and the rap patrol was
going through the village
the pf's run the village bell to warn
the villagers that there was
people roaming about the village like
they didn't know if they were americans
or
nba they didn't know so as soon as they
started ringing the bell the rat patrol
opened up and just split and then they
came back into the night lager and we
called in a 175
mission on the village of about 30 or 40
rounds
and the next morning we were
still set up in the night lager eating
breakfast
when you might call it delegation from
the village came up
there was approximately four or five
people that came up under a
vietnamese flag an american flag walking
into our perimeter
and they did this in fact to show that
we were wrong in blowing up their
village
and they wanted to speak to us and find
out why we did it
and when they walked into the perimeter
they were
messed with by the other people in the
company the vietnamese flag was taken
away from one guy a few of them were
punched a couple of them were
tripped they were just generally
harassed and these people were
coming into our our camp to find out why
we had destroyed their village when
the village itself was only one or two
kilometers from a big base camp
and there was uh troops of the south
vietnamese army
stationed in that village for their own
protection and we had called in an
artillery strike
and i was there from august of 1967 to
august
1968 and
during that time that was the time of
the big ted offensive
where da nang the marine regiment danang
was overrun
my battalion was reactionary battalion
for americal division
in other words whenever a marical
intelligence had some
report of an enemy buildup or an enemy
concentration
or a heavy attack on a base camp
anywhere in the i-corps
we were picked up wherever we were in
helicopters and flown to that
place and uh when we were called in it
was usually
declared as a free fire zone meaning
that
uh the man on point the man worked
walking first
in the company whenever he felt
that his personal safety was in danger
such as
walking across the rights patty when
there was a jungle on the other side if
he felt his personal safety was in
danger
then he had like permission to open up
on the opposite jungle line
it didn't matter if he knew anything was
there it could have been a friendly
village or anything it was just
there might be somebody there who's
going to shoot you and you acted on that
did you pin down some of these uh places
uh where the
where you say that the two men opened
fire on this
uh yeah well he had an id they took it
from him
it happened in a place called the rice
bowl
exact position i couldn't tell you i i
didn't even know where i was half the
time it was just
we're walking 20 clicks this way today
and we wake up and you know you carry
this and walk this way
what was the area of responsibility of
the one i needed at that time
uh anywhere in the americal zone it was
reactionary when
any ever anything happened or they
suspected anything to happen
it was usually my battalion a company
from my battalion was flown in first
[Music]
i would say march of 1968 that that's
not a definite date
that was throughout the same time
just before before
you know anyway let's say general
customer was your ceo at the time
handed down uh you know
sort of pressure for body talent how did
how did he act
i don't know i never saw a general nice
well we were lucky if we know the
colonel came out once or twice the whole
time i was there
it wasn't considered safe where we were
for officers to come out
the higher officers yeah
higher officers didn't have anything to
do with any tight combats
uh i wouldn't necessarily say
keep their hands clean but they didn't
they didn't mind getting us killed but
they didn't want to get
that killed soldiers were often so
anxious to shoot that they sometimes
shot each other was this a common
occurrence
uh that was an uncommon occurrence but
it was at night
and it's just a general thing you don't
walk outside the perimeter at night
for a 175 mission on a village where
there were popular forces
uh we just the person who was in charge
of the rat patrol
uh called it in said that they had
received fire
there's a lot of supposed tubes
[Music]
captain master would like to ask uh mr
dollar question
[Music]
excuse me this is a question that's been
coming across my mind through most of
the testimony
is what would happen to individuals such
as yourself who would refuse
refuse to do these things or what the
army calls refuse to go to the field
uh my company itself
we were at a place called ld center
which is sort of divides the offshore
valley it's right on the perimeter of
the all-shaw valley
and uh we got trapped on top of the hill
for three days
where we couldn't get out of our box
holes without being shot at we were up
against the headquarters battalion of
the
north vietnamese heavy armored regiment
and on the hill
complex that we were on the nba had 11
53 caliber machine guns
approximately four mortar positions down
in the valley and approximately three
recoilless
rifle positions down in the valley so
that any time
any of our men came out of our foxholes
we were being shelled
and it took us two and a half days to
get off of the hill
and we went down into the valley and
spent a night just down in the valley
and
that evening orders came down for us to
go back up the hill
uh we as a company refuse to go
we just told them to forget it and as a
company we did this
like everybody except for the captain
and one lieutenant
and the one lieutenant was behind this
but he couldn't refuse a direct order
or else he would have gotten 15 years in
leavenworth but there was nothing they
could do to a whole company of us
unless they wanted to put the whole
company in jail
uh i'd say april of 1968
it was company b first of sixth infantry
198th fighting for true brigade
[Music]
uh he caught up the colonel and told the
colonel that the company refused to go
back up the hill and he wasn't going
back up by himself
[Music]
colonel was sort of pissed that we went
back into base camp that afternoon
richard dell and michael yule both
veterans of the americal division
appearing on december 1st before the
national veterans inquiry into u.s war
crimes policy
organized by anti-war vietnam veterans
this has been military monitor this is
steve bookchest through pacifica radio
washington